1. History of Reactive Agents 2. Braitenberg Vehicles 3. Chemotaxis 4. Behavior-Based Robotics
1. choose the next action based only on what they currently perceive, using a policy or set of rules which are simple to apply 2. unable to remember, plan or logically reason 3. interesting behaviors can emerge from these simple rules
1. 1948 Alan Turing (importance of embodiment) 2. 1969 Herbert Simon (parable of ant on beach) 3. 1984 Valentino Braitenberg (Vehicles) 4. 1991 Rodney Brooks (Intelligence without Reason) 5. 1995 Lego MindStorms
1. Braitenberg showed how simple arrangements of sensors and motors can lead to surprisingly sophisticated behavior 2. simplest vehicles have two wheels and two sensors 3. sensors respond to a light source 4. response is inversely proportional to distance
1. connections can be  straight or crossed  excitatory (+) or inhibitory (-) 2. leads to four behaviors  hate  fear  love  curiosity   
1. Many single- and multi-cell organisms can direct their movement to swim to areas with higher (or lower) chemical concentration 2. bacteria use flagella to propel themselves  anti-clockwise → rotation  linear motion  clockwise rotation → tumbling motion
1. normally, bacterium switches between linear and tumbling motion, producing a random walk 2. if it senses that it is heading in the right direction, it will lengthen the current period of linear motion 3. in this way, it can successfully move toward food sources and away from toxins
The rules used by the Didabots: 1. normally, move forward 2. if you detect an obstacle to the left or right, turn away from it 3. if you detect an obstacle directly in front, move forward
Introduced by Rodney Brooks in the late 1980s as a challenge to Good Old Fashioned AI (GOFAI) 1. robots should be based on insects rather than humans 2. tasks like walking and avoiding obstacles rather than playing Chess 3. abandon traditional horizontal decompositon  Sense  Plan  Act 4. replace with vertical decompositon or subsumption architecture  each layer can connect sensing right through to action
sensors p e r c e p t i o n m o d e l i n g p l a n n n i n g t a s k   e x e c u t i o n m o t o r   c o n t r o l actuators
sensors manipulate the world build maps explore avoid hitting things locomote actuators
1. Each layer in the vertical decomposition is a behavior  low-level behaviors like avoid hitting things are reactive, connecting sensors directly to actuators  mid-level behaviors like build maps make use of a world model  high-level behaviors make use of world model and planning 2. higher level behavior may take control from lower-level behavior  e.g. if the low-level behavior has gotten stuck 3. lower level behavior may take control from higher-level behavior  e.g. to avoid getting burned, or falling down a staircase
1. Valentino Braitenberg, Vehicles: Experiments in Synthetic Psychology, MIT Press, 1984. 2. Rolf Pfeifer & Christian Sheier, Understanding Intelligence, MIT Press, 1999.  http://www.ifi.unizh.ch/ailab 3. Rodney Brooks, Cambrian Intelligence: the Early History of the New AI, MIT Press, 1999.  http://www.csail.mit.edu
