What is the definition of a neural network?
Why neural networks?
What is the theory about Intelligence?
What is the history of artificial intelligence origins?
What is the history of neural network origins?
What is the history of serial symbolic AI origins?
What is the definition of neural network “Dark Ages”?
What is the definition of knowledge-based systems?
What is the history of neural network renaissance?
What are applications of deep learning?
What is the history of deep learning?
What is the definition of neuroanatomy?
What is the definition of cerebral cortex?
What is the definition of brain stem?
What is the definition of cerebellum and its functions?
What are the functions of midbrain?
What is the definition and function of thalamus?
What is the definition and function of hypothalamus?
What is definition and function of limbic system?
What and why neurons as body cells?
What is the differences between neurons and body cells?
What are the definition of axons and dendrites?
What are the definition of synapses and ion channels?
What is the definition of the big picture?
What is the definition of hubel and weisel – visual cortex?
What are the definition of convolutional networks?
What are the definition of recurrent neural networks?
What are the definition of autoencoder networks?
What are the definition of spiking neurons?
What is the outline of perceptrons?
What are the definition of biological neurons?
What are the definition of artificial neural networks?
What is the definition of mcculloch & pitts model of a single neuron?
What is the function of a perceptron?
What is the definition of historical context?
What is the outline of backpropagation?
What are the types of learning?
What is supervised learning?
What are the definition of supervised learning – issues?
What is the definition of ockham’s razor?
How to solve many useful functions are not linearly separable?
What is the definition of two-layer neural network?
What is the definition of xor problem?
Why nn training as cost minimization?
What is the problem of local search in weight space?
What is the definition of gradient descent?
What is the definition of chain rule?
What are the definition of two-layer nn’s – applications?
What are the definition of training tips?
What is the definition of alvinn?
What is the summary of backpropagation?
What is the outline of variations on backprop?
What is the definition of probability?
What are the definition of random variables?
What are the definition of variations on backprop？
What is the definition and function of cross entropy?
What is the definition of maximum likelihood?
What is the definition of bayes’ rule?
What is the example of medical diagnosis?
What is the example of light bulb defects?
How is the Bayes Rule in Machine Learning?
How to use weight decay?
How to use momentum?
What is the definition of conjugate gradients?
What is the definition of natural gradients (Amari, 1995)?
What is the outline of geometry of hidden units?
What is the definition of symmetries?
What is the definition of controlled nonlinearity?
What are the limitations of two-layer neural networks and is there any example?
How to add hidden layers?
How to vanish / explode gradients?
What are the solutions to vanishing gradients?
What are the definition of activation functions?
What is the definition of dropout?
What is the definition of ensembling?
What is the definition of bagging?
How dropout as an implicit ensemble?
What is the definition of convolutional network?
What is the definition of hubel and weisel – visual cortex?
What is the definition of convolutional network components?
What is the definition of Convolutional Network Architecture?
What is the definition of softmax?
How does the convolutional neural networks work?
What is the example of LeNet?
What is the example of LeNet trained on MNIST?
How to do convolution with zero padding?
What is the example of AlexNet (2012)?
What is the definition of stride?
How to stride dimensions?
How to stride with zero padding?
What is the example of AlexNet Conv Layer 1?
What is the definition of overlapping pooling?
What is the outline of image processing?
What is the definition of MNIST Handwritten Digit Dataset?
What is the definition of CIFAR Image Dataset?
What is the definition of ImageNet LSVRC Dataset?
What are the definitions of Image Processing Tasks?
How does LeNet train on MNIST?
What is the history of ImageNet Architectures?
What is the definition of AlexNet Architecture?
What is the definition of AlexNet Details?
What is the definition of enhancements?
What is the definition of data augmentation?
What is the definition of convolution kernels?
How to deal with deep networks?
What is the statistics example of coin tossing?
What is the definition of residual networks?
What is the definition of Dense Networks?
What is the definition of neural texture synthesis?
What is the references of image processing?
What is the outline of recurrent networks?
What is the definition of processing temporal sequences?
What is the definition of sliding window?
What is the definition of NetTalk Task?
What is the definition of NetTalk?
What is the definition of simple recurrent network (Elman, 1990)?
What is the definition of back propagation through time?
What is the definition of other recurrent network architectures?
What is the task of Formal Language Recognition?
What is the definition of Dynamical Recognizers?
What is the task of Formal Language Prediction?
How to count by Spiralling?
What is the definition of long range dependencies? 
What is the resource of long short term memory?
What is the definition of simple recurrent network?
