1. Module 2: Wumpus World, Robocup Soccer 2. Module 3: Path Planning (mazes, graph search) 3. Module 4: Path Search Puzzles (8-puzzle, Rubik’s cube) 4. Module 5: Games (board games, dice games, card games) 5. Module 6: Constraint Satisfaction (N-queens, Sudoku)
We want a unified framework that can be used to specify, characterize, compare and contrast different AI tasks.
Agents can be evaluated empirically, sometimes analysed mathematically Agent is a function from percept sequences to actions Ideal rational agent would pick actions which are expected to maximise the performance measure.
1. Performance measure 2. Environment 3. Actuators 4. Sensors
Performance measure: +1 for a Win, + 1/2 for a Draw, 0 for a Loss. Environment: board, pieces Actuators: move piece to new square Sensors: which piece is on which square
Performance measure: safety, reach destination, maximize profits, obey laws, passenger comfort, . . . Environment: city streets, freeways, traffic, pedestrians, weather, customers, . . . Actuators: steer, accelerate, brake, horn, speak/display, . . . Sensors: video, accelerometers, gauges, engine sensors, keyboard, GPS, . . .
1. Environment: Squares adjacent to Wumpus are Smelly  Squares adjacent to Pit are Breezy  Glitter iff Gold is in the same square  Shoot  kills Wumpus if you are facing it  uses up the only arrow  Grab  picks up Gold if in same square 
1. Performance measure:  Return with Gold +1000, death -1000  -1 per step, -10 for using the arrow 2. Actuators:  Left, Right, Forward, Grab, Shoot 3. Sensors:  Breeze, Glitter, Stench
Simulated vs. Situated or Embodied, Static vs. Dynamic, Discrete vs. Continuous Fully Observable vs. Partially Observable Deterministic vs. Stochastic Episodic vs. Sequential Known vs. Unknown Single-Agent vs. Multi-Agent
Simulated: a separate program is used to simulate an environment, feed percepts to agents, evaluate performance, etc. Static: environment doesn’t change while the agent is deliberating Discrete: finite (or countable) number of possible percepts/actions Fully Observable: percept contains all relevant information about the world Deterministic: current state of world uniquely determines the next Episodic: every action by the agent is evaluated independently Known: the rules of the game, or physics/dynamics of the environment are known to the agent Single-Agent: only one agent acting in the environment
1. Chess is Simulated, Robocup is Situated and Embodied Simulated: a separate program is used to simulate an environment, feed percepts to agents, evaluate performance, etc. Situated: the agent acts directly on the actual environment Embodied: the agent has a physical body in the world Question: If Chess is played on a physical board with actual pieces, would it become embodied?
1. Chess is Simulated, Robocup is Situated and Embodied Simulated: a separate program is used to simulate an environment, feed percepts to agents, evaluate performance, etc. Situated: the agent acts directly on the actual environment Embodied: the agent has a physical body in the world Question: If Chess is played on a physical board with actual pieces, would it become embodied? Answer: Yes it would; however, we normally abstract away the game itself (choice of moves), and treat the movement of the pieces as a separate task.
1. Chess is Simulated, Robocup is Situated and Embodied 2. Chess is Static, Robocup is Dynamic Static: the environment does not change while the agent is thinking Dynamic: the environment may change while the agent is thinking e.g. if the ball is in front of you but you take too long to act, another player may come in and kick it away Notes: 1. In a multi-player game, Static environment will obviously change when the opponent moves, but cannot change once it is our turn. 2. In tournament Chess, the clock will tick down while the player is thinking (thus making it slightly non-static).
1. Chess is Simulated, Robocup is Situated and Embodied 2. Chess is Static, Robocup is Dynamic 3. Chess is Discrete, Robocup is Continuous Discrete: only a finite (or countable) number of discrete percepts / actions Continuous: states, percepts or actions can vary continuously e.g. each piece must be on one square or the other, not half way in between.
1. Chess is simulated, Robocup is Situated and Embodied 2. Chess is Static, Robocup is Dynamic 3. Chess is Discrete, Robocup is Continuous 4. Chess is Fully Observable, Robocup (Legged) is Partially Observable Fully Observable: agent percept contains all relevant information about the world Partially Observable: some relevant information is hidden from the agent [watch Dog’s Eye View video] [watch Melbourne vs. Cornell video] Note: The Robocup F180 League is close to fully observable, because the robots have access to an external computer connected to an overhead camera.
1. Chess is Simulated, Robocup is Situated and Embodied 2. Chess is Static, Robocup is Dynamic 3. Chess is Discrete, Robocup is Continuous 4. Chess is fully observable, Robocup (Legged) is Partially Observable 5. Chess is Deterministic, Robocup is Stochastic Deterministic: the current state uniquely determines the next state Stochastic: there is some random element involved Note: The non-determinisim partly arises because the physics can only be modeled with limited precision. But, even if it could be modeled perfectly, there would still be randomness due to quantum mechanical effects.
1. Chess is Simulated, Robocup is Situated and Embodied 2. Chess is Static, Robocup is Dynamic 3. Chess is Discrete, Robocup is Continuous 4. Chess is Fully Observable, Robocup (Legged) is Partially Observable 5. Chess is Deterministic, Robocup is Stochastic 6. Both Chess and Robocup are Sequential Episodic: every action by the agent is evaluated independently Sequential: the agent is evaluated based on a long sequence of actions Both Chess and Robocup are considered Sequential, because evaluation only happens at the end of a game, and it is necessary to plan several steps ahead in order to play the game well.
1. Chess is Simulated, Robocup is Situated and Embodied 2. Chess is Static, Robocup is Dynamic 3. Chess is Discrete, Robocup is Continuous 4. Chess is Fully Observable, Robocup (Legged) is Partially Observable 5. Chess is Deterministic, Robocup is Stochastic 6. Both Chess and Robocup are Sequential 7. Both Chess and Robocup are Known Known: the rules of the game, or physics / dynamics of the environment, are known to the agent. Note: Video Games like Infinite Mario are sometimes set up in such a way that the dynamics of the environment are Unknown to the agent.
1. Chess is Simulated, Robocup is Situated and Embodied 2. Chess is Static, Robocup is Dynamic 3. Chess is Discrete, Robocup is Continuous 4. Chess is Fully Observable, Robocup (Legged) is Partially Observable 5. Chess is Deterministic, Robocup is Stochastic 6. Both Chess and Robocup are Sequential 7. Both Chess and Robocup are Known 8. Both Chess and Robocup are Multi-Agent Examples of Single-Agent tasks include: 9. solving puzzles like Sudoku, or Rubik’s cube 10. Solitaire card games
1. Like Chess, Wumpus World is Simulated, Static, Discrete, Sequential and Known. 2. Wumpus World is Partially Observable  for example, you don’t know where the Wumpus is. 3. Wumpus World is normally considered Deterministic, because the location of the Wumpus, Gold and Pits are determined at the beginning and don’t change after that. 4. Wumpus World is Single-Agent. We consider the Wumpus as a natural feature, because it doesn’t move and can’t make any choices.
1. Like Chess, Backgammon is Simulated, Static, Discrete, Sequential and Known and Multi-Agent. 2. Normally, we consider Backgammon to be Fully Observable and Stochastic. The dice rolls are random, but all players can see them. 3. If instead the dice rolls are generated by a computer using a pseudo- random number generator, with a specified seed, the game could be considered Deterministic but Partially Observable. In this case, the sequence of dice rolls is fully determined by the seed, but future dice rolls are not observable by the players.
1. Card Games like Poker, Rummy or Mahjong are Simulated, Static, Discrete, Sequential, Known and Multi-Agent. 2. Card Games are Stochastic if the cards are shuffled during the game, but can be considered Deterministic if the cards are shuffled only once, before the game begins. 3. Card Games are Partially Observable and involve Asymmetric Information in the sense that each player can see their own cards but not those of other players.
Rodney Brooks 1991:  Situatedness: The robots are situated in the world  they do not deal with abstract descriptions, but with the here and now of the environment which directly influences the behaviour of the system.  Embodiment: The robots have bodies and experience the world directly  their actions are part of a dynamics with the world, and actions have immediate feedback on the robot’s own sensations.
1. Situated but not Embodied: High frequency stock trading system:  it deals with thousands of buy/sell bids per second and its responses vary as its database changes.  but it interacts with the world only through sending and receiving messages. 2. Embodied but not Situated: an industrial spray painting robot:  does not perceive any aspects of the shape of an object presented to it for painting; simply goes through a pre-programmed series of actions  but it has physical extent and its servo routines must correct for its interactions with gravity and noise present in the system.
1. AI tasks or environments can be classfied in terms of whether they are simulated, static, discrete, fully observable, deterministic, episodic, known, single- or multi- agent. 2. The environment type strongly influences the agent design (discussed in the next section..)
